

* * *

##### Sunday, November 10, 2013

###  The story of None, True and False (and an explanation of literals,
keywords and builtins thrown in)

I received an interesting question in the mail recently:  

> _What is the difference between keywords and literals? Why are True and
False keywords rather than literals in python3?_

> _I was horrified recently to find that assigning to True/False works in
python2. So I went digging, and found that True and False were created to be
'constants' like None in PEP 285. Assignment to None was disallowed in 2.4,
but not to True/False until python3. Was there a reason None was originally
built as a variable rather than a literal?_

Let's start with the first question: keywords and literals.  
  
A keyword, in the context of defining the syntax of a language, also known as
a reserved word, is something that looks like an identifier in the language,
but from the parser's point of view act like a token of the language. An
identifier is defined as a sequence of one or more letters, digits and
underscores, not starting with a digit. (This is Python's definition, but many
languages, like C or Java, use the same or a very similar definition.)  
  
The important thing to remember about keywords is that a keyword cannot be
used to name a variable (or function, class, etc.). Some well-known keywords
in Python include 'if', 'while', 'for', 'and', 'or'.  
  
A literal, on the other hand, is an element of an expression that describes a
constant value. Examples of literals are numbers (e.g. 42, 3.14, or 1.6e-10)
and strings (e.g. "Hello, world"). Literals are recognized by the parser, and
the exact rules for how literals are parsed are often quite subtle. For
example, these are all numeric literals in Python 3:  

> 123  
>  1.0  
>  1.  
>  .01e10  
>  .1e+42  
>  123.456e-100  
>  0xfffe  
>  0o755

but these are not:  

> . (dot)  
>  e10 (identifier)  
>  0y12 (the literal 0 followed by the identifier y12)  
>  0xffe+10 (the literal 0xffe followed by a plus sign and and the number 10)

Note the distinction between a constant and a literal. We often write code
defining "constants", e.g.  

> MAX_LEVELS = 15

Here, 15 is a literal, but MAX_LEVELS is not -- it is an identifier, and the
all-caps form of the name suggests to the reader that it is probably not
changed anywhere in the code, which means that we can consider it a constant
-- but this is just a convention, and the Python parser doesn't know about
that convention, nor does it enforce it.  
  
On the other hand, the parser won't let you write  

> 15 = MAX_LEVELS

This is because the left-hand side of the assignment operator (=) must be a
variable, and a literal is not a variable. (The exact definition of variable
is complex, since some things that look like expressions are also considered
to be variables, such as d[k], (a, b), and foo.bar -- but not f() or () or 42.
This definition of variable is also used by the "del" statement.)  
  
Now on to None, True and False.  
  
Let's begin with None, because it has always been in the language. (True and
False were relatively recent additions -- they first made their appearance in
Python 2.2.1, to be precise.) None is a singleton object (meaning there is
only one None), used in many places in the language and library to represent
the absence of some other value. For example, if d is a dictionary, d.get(k)
will return d[k] if it exists, but None if d has no key k. In earlier versions
of Python, None was just a "built-in name". The parser had no special
knowledge of None -- just like it doesn't have special knowledge of built-in
types like int, float or str, or built-in exceptions like KeyError or
ZeroDivisionError. All of these are treated by the parser as identifiers, and
when your code is being interpreted they are looked up just like any other
names (e.g. the functions and variables you define yourself). So from the
parser's perspective, the following are treated the same, and the parse tree
it produces ( <name> = <name>) is the same in each case:  

> x = None  
>  x = int  
>  x = foobar

On the other hand, the following produce different parse trees (<name> =
<literal>):  

> x = 42  
>  x = 'hello'

because the parser treats numeric and string literals as different from
identifiers. Combining this with the earlier MAX_LEVEL examples, we can see
that if we swap the left and right hand sides, the first three will still be
accepted by the parser (<name> = <name>), while the swapped version of the
second set will be rejected (<literal> = <name> is invalid).  
  
The practical consequence is that, if you really want to mess with your
readers, you can write code that reassigns built-ins; for example, you could
write:  

> int = float  
>  def parse_string(s):  
>  return int(s)  
>  print(parse_string('42')) # Will print '42.0'

Some of you may respond to this with "So what? Reasonable programmers don't
write such code." Others may react in the opposite way, saying "Why on earth
does the language allow assignment to a built-in name like 'int' at all?!"  
  
The answer is subtle, and has to do with consistency and evolution of the
language. I bet that without looking it up you won't be able to give a
complete list all built-in names defined by Python. (I know I can't.)
Moreover, I bet that many of you won't recognize every single name on that
list. (To see the list, try typing dir(__builtins__) at the Python command
prompt.)  
  
Take for example the weird built-ins named copyright, credits or license. They
exist so that we can mention them in the greeting shown when you start Python
interactively:  

> Python 3.4.0a4+ (default:0917f6c62c62, Oct 22 2013, 10:55:35)  
> [GCC 4.2.1 Compatible Apple LLVM 4.2 (clang-425.0.28)] on darwin  
> Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.  
> >>> credits  
> Thanks to CWI, CNRI, BeOpen.com, Zope Corporation and a cast of thousands  
> for supporting Python development. See www.python.org for more information.  
> >>>

In order for this to work, we made them built-ins. But does this mean you
shouldn't be allowed to use 'credits' as a variable or parameter name? I think
not. Certainly many people don't realize that these esoteric built-ins even
exist, and they would be surprised if they were prevented from using them as
variable names. From here, it's just a gradual path. Many people write
functions or methods with arguments named str or len, or with names like
compile or format. Moreover, suppose you wrote some Python 2.5 code where you
used bytes as a variable name. In Python 2.6, we added a built-in function
named 'bytes' (it's an alias for str, actually). Should your code now be
considered invalid? There's no reason for that, and in fact your code will be
fine. (Even in Python 3, where bytes is one of the fundamental types.)  
  
On the other hand, you cannot have a variable named 'if' or 'try', because
these are reserved words (keywords) that are treated special by the parser.
Because you cannot use these as variable or function names anywhere, ever, in
any Python program, everyone using Python has to know about all the reserved
words in the language, even if they don't have any need for them. For this
reason, we try to keep the list of reserved words small, and the core
developers hem and haw a lot before adding a new reserved word to the
language.  
  
In fact, many proposed new features have been killed because they would
require a new keyword; others have been modified to avoid that need. Also,
when we do decide to add a new keyword, we start a deprecation campaign at
least one release before the new keyword is introduced, warning developers to
choose a different name for their variables. (There's also a trick to allow
developers to choose to use the new keyword right away; this is why we have
e.g. "from __future__ import with_statement".)  
  
There's no such concern for built-ins. Code that happens to use the name of a
new built-in as a variable or function name will continue to function (as long
as you don't also try to use the new built-in in the same function). While we
still try to be conservative with the introduction of new built-ins, at least
we don't have to worry about breaking working code by merely adding something
to the language. The (small) price we pay for this is the possibility that
some joker intentionally redefines a built-in just to confuse others. But
there are tons of other ways to write unreadable code, and I don't see this as
a particularly bad problem.  
  
So, after this long detour about built-ins vs. keywords, back to None. Why did
we eventually make None a reserved word? Frankly, the reasons were perhaps
mostly social. Unlike some built-ins and many exceptions, None is so central
to using Python that you really can't be using Python without knowing about
None. So people were (like our question-asker) "horrified" when they found
that assignment to None was actually allowed at all. Worse, there was the
concern (whether founded or not) that the way name lookup in Python works,
"evaluating" the expression None is slow, because it requires at least two
dictionary lookups (all names are looked up in the globals dict before being
looked up in the built-ins dict).  
  
In the end we decided that there was no downside to making None a keyword
(there is no code that actually assigns to it) and it might make some code a
tiny bit faster, or catch rare typos. There was still a one-time cost to the
developer community (changes to the parser and documentation) but this was
small enough that we din't hesitate very long.  
  
The situation for True/False is a little different. They weren't always part
of the language, and many people had invented their own convention. People
would define constants named true and false, True and False, or TRUE and
FALSE, and use those consistently throughout their code. I don't recall which
spelling was most popular, but when we introduced True and False into the
language, we definitely did not want to break any packages that were defining
their own True and False constants. (One concern was that those packages would
have to have a way to continue to run on previous Python versions.)  
  
So, essentially our hand was forced in this case, and we had to introduce True
and False as built-in constants, not as keywords. But over time, code defining
its own versions of True and False (by whichever name) became more and more
frowned upon, and by the time Python 3 came around, when we looked at
opportunities for cleaning up the language, we found that it was logical to
make True and False keywords, by analogy to None.  
  
And there you have it. It's all completely logical, once you understand the
context. :-) Sorry for the long response; I hope it's been educational.  
  
**UPDATE:** I still forgot to answer whether None/True/False are literals or
keywords. My answer is that they are both. They are keywords because that's
how the parser recognizes them. They are literals because that's their role in
expressions and because they stand for constant values. One could argue about
whether things like {'foo': 42} are literals; personally I'd prefer to give
these some other name, because otherwise what would you call {'foo': x+1}? The
[language
reference](http://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#displays-for-
lists-sets-and-dictionaries) calls both of these "displays".

Posted by  [ Guido van Rossum
](https://www.blogger.com/profile/12821714508588242516 "author profile") at
[2:40 PM](http://python-history.blogspot.ca/2013/11/story-of-none-true-
false.html "permanent link") [
![](https://resources.blogblog.com/img/icon18_edit_allbkg.gif)
](https://www.blogger.com/post-
edit.g?blogID=8699431508730375743&postID=5526235131217291440&from=pencil "Edit
Post")

Labels: [False](http://python-history.blogspot.ca/search/label/False),
[keywords](http://python-history.blogspot.ca/search/label/keywords),
[literals](http://python-history.blogspot.ca/search/label/literals),
[None](http://python-history.blogspot.ca/search/label/None),
[python](http://python-history.blogspot.ca/search/label/python), [reserved
words](http://python-history.blogspot.ca/search/label/reserved%20words),
[True](http://python-history.blogspot.ca/search/label/True)

  *[9:29 AM]: 2009-01-13T09:29:00-08:00
  *[9:17 AM]: 2009-01-13T09:17:00-08:00
  *[3:19 PM]: 2009-01-20T15:19:00-08:00
  *[2:05 PM]: 2009-01-20T14:05:00-08:00
  *[2:01 PM]: 2009-01-27T14:01:00-08:00
  *[6:40 AM]: 2009-01-28T06:40:00-08:00
  *[10:53 AM]: 2009-02-03T10:53:00-08:00
  *[11:27 AM]: 2009-02-10T11:27:00-08:00
  *[11:25 AM]: 2009-02-18T11:25:00-08:00
  *[11:59 AM]: 2009-02-27T11:59:00-08:00
  *[12:02 PM]: 2009-03-03T12:02:00-08:00
  *[9:26 AM]: 2009-03-06T09:26:00-08:00
  *[1:31 PM]: 2009-03-10T13:31:00-07:00
  *[1:07 PM]: 2009-03-17T13:07:00-07:00
  *[8:44 AM]: 2013-10-24T08:44:00-07:00
  *[11:05 AM]: 2009-04-21T11:05:00-07:00
  *[4:35 PM]: 2009-04-22T16:35:00-07:00
  *[11:01 AM]: 2009-04-23T11:01:00-07:00
  *[9:14 AM]: 2009-04-24T09:14:00-07:00
  *[11:31 AM]: 2010-06-21T11:31:00-07:00
  *[11:26 AM]: 2010-06-21T11:26:00-07:00
  *[11:18 AM]: 2010-06-21T11:18:00-07:00
  *[11:07 AM]: 2010-06-21T11:07:00-07:00
  *[10:41 AM]: 2010-06-23T10:41:00-07:00
  *[8:39 AM]: 2010-06-29T08:39:00-07:00
  *[9:49 AM]: 2010-08-24T09:49:00-07:00
  *[4:13 PM]: 2011-07-08T16:13:00-07:00
  *[9:58 AM]: 2013-10-24T09:58:00-07:00
  *[2:40 PM]: 2013-11-10T14:40:00-08:00

